The Cabinet has agreed a cut in excise duty on petrol and diesel.

The reduction will be 20 cent per litre on petrol and 15 cent per litre of diesel.

A cut of 2 cent per litre on green diesel has been agreed.

The reduction will be in place until 31 August and will cost €320 million.

An incorporeal Cabinet meeting is being held this morning to sign off on the measures, which were put forward by Minister for Finance Paschal Donohoe.

Sinn Féin had called for measures that would result in a 25 cent cut per litre of diesel and petrol.

The party also wants any cuts capped at €1.75 per litre to ensure the reductions are not quickly eroded.

Amid warnings to the Government about the economic impact of war in Ukraine on this country, senior figures in the coalition have insisted there is no prospect of short-term rationing of gas and electricity.

However, they said that all energy resources are now very precious and planning for "scary" scenarios has to take place.

The State currently maintains a 90-day reserve of crude and refined oil product.

On cyber security, ministers were told that the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) has engaged extensively across government departments and with operators of essential services before and since the invasion of Ukraine by Russia.

There is ongoing engagement with similar capabilities across the European Union, UK, and the US.

On the economy, the Government was told the impact of sanctions had created volatility on energy prices across the globe.

Fuels for Ireland said the Government is recognising that it must use excise duty to reduce the cost of fuel to consumers.

CEO Kevin McPartland said the figure announced today needs to be under regular review.

He said if prices increase further the Government has to make sure that Irish businesses are insulated from the impact.

Fuels for Ireland welcomed the move by the Government to cut excise duty, but cautioned that ''it is only going to get us back to where we were two or three days ago.''

Mr McPartland said diesel on the wholesale market went up by 22 cent yesterday

He added the reduction is not ''going to have a dramatic impact straight away.''