Some international tournaments capture the imagination with their sheer energy and joy, featuring footballing flamboyance or ground-breaking, era-defining tactical revolutions. The triumphs and disasters played out in front of the watching world can resurrect memories of childhood summers past, reaffirming a love for the game that some lesser tournaments may make us question. Some tournaments just have it all, and the European Championship of 2008 was one of those.  

This gem of a tournament sizzled with sensational shocks, drama and wonderful football. Several teams hit early heights before faltering and losing their way; save for one that is.  One team shone throughout, dazzling their audience with a style and panache that was to leave the opposition struggling for answers with its incisive speed and dominance of the ball.

Playing with a high tempo, energetic style, valuing purposeful possession over furious endeavour, the Spain of 2008 had adopted an approach that would see them dominate and embark on an era of supremacy unprecedented in the modern age. Like Greece in 2004, the collective harmony was evident, but in Spain there were the crucial additions of precise technique, inventive creativity, perpetual movement and devastating attack that made La Roja irresistible in 2008.

Their crowning glory exemplified all that was great about Euro 2008, but Spain were far from the only compelling story of that summer, when the alpine air echoed to the sounds both of repeated thunderstorms and of the omnipresent White Stripes’ Seven Nation Army.

In Switzerland’s opening match against the Czech Republic in Basel’s St Jakob Park, the home fans’ exuberant optimism was punctured early on. Swiss hopes quickly faded the moment Alexander Frei, their energetic inspiration, was forced out of both this game and the tournament with a knee ligament injury. Without him, Switzerland lost any initiative, and with it, the match.

Frei’s absence ended Switzerland’s hopes not just on opening night, but effectively ended their hopes of progressing. Against Turkey, their next match was played out in a torrential downpour, illuminated by lightning bolts cutting through the sky overhead. The pitch was bordering on unplayable at times, even if the pools of water assisted Switzerland in their opening goal. Not for the last time in this tournament, though, Turkey came from behind to win in stoppage time – and with that the Swiss were dumped out with a game to spare.

Some consolation would come with a win over Portugal’s reserves in the final group match, but the disappointment of failing in a home tournament was palpable. The loss of Frei impacted too greatly on a side lacking depth. With him, they were up against it; without him, they were cut adrift in the thunderstorm, unable to navigate their way to the promised land of the knockout rounds.

Meanwhile, across in Vienna, the Austrians were backed by a sizzling atmosphere, but their team were even less well equipped than the Swiss to progress. In their opening match against Croatia, it took barely two minutes for the enthusiasm to be dampened and for brutal reality to set in. Having waited for 18 years for a major tournament appearance, it took Rene Aufhauser only until that point to give away a penalty which Luka Modrić duly converted. 

From the high of the big kick-off, the crash back down to earth had taken a mere 120 seconds. Austria’s campaign would never fully recover from this setback as much as their industrious endeavour kept them in contact in each game they played, although they did steel a draw at the end of their next match thanks to a stoppage-time penalty against Poland.